WIM: Hello, everyone.
In this short
video, we are going
to introduce two
new concepts that
are slightly more advanced.
And they are currying
and partial application.
So consider the
function signature
like this, where we
have a type X, Y, Z,
and return value of type A.
So this is a function that
takes three arguments
of three different types
and produces a return
value of type A.
However, the arrow here in this
type signature is meaningful.
And also, it has a
certain associativity.
In fact, it associates
to the right.
And that means
that, actually, we
can write this expression
also like this,
which means that we actually can
consider f as a function that
takes an element of type X
and returns a function of Y
to function of Z to A.
Similar, this
return function, Y,
can be considered both as
a function of Y and Z to A
or as a function of Y
to Z to A. So this idea
that you can always
rewrite the function
of a single argument
returning another function
is called currying.
To illustrate this on
an actual function,
it's easiest to use
lambda functions.
So suppose we have a lambda
function of X, Y, and Z,
and function body
is completely irrelevant.
Then to rewrite
this, so that
this becomes a function
of a single argument.
We create a new lambda
function, which is this one.
So the body remains
completely untouched.
And we can rewrite this
inner function once more.
And in this way, we
have created a function
of a single argument
which returns
a function of a
single argument which
returns a function of a single
argument, which eventually
returns the value.
So this is the typical
technique known
as currying you
use to transform multi-argument
functions into single argument functions.
So it's named after the
logician Haskell Curry.
But actually, he wasn't
the first to invent this.
The first one to
invent this technique
was called Moses Schonfinkel,
another logician.
But well, his name
wasn't so catchy,
so they decided to
go with currying.
Another concept closely
related to currying
is that of partial application.
For example, consider
the function sq,
which takes X and Y and
returns the sum of the squares.
This function can
actually, again,
be slightly rewritten
as-- because the function
application, actually,
is left associative.
That means that
what we have here is
a function in its own
right that operates on Y.
So we can do other things
like, for instance, say OK.
Let's define sq4 as sq4.
And now sq4 is a new function
which just takes one argument.
If we now call Sq4 on value
three, it will return 25.
This is an example of
partial application.
So basically, we've applied
four to the function argument x,
but we haven't applied
anything to y,
and the result is
a new function.
And then we can use
this new function
for doing our computation.
So this technique of
partial application
is really used a lot in
functional programming
in Haskell, and it's the reason
why you can write things,
for instance, like this.
So here, the times two
is partial application
of the function multiplication
that we use as an operator
here, so it takes two arguments
and returns an argument.
We have applied it
partially, using the two.
We get a new function,
which we can use in the map,
because map requires functions
with a single argument.
And so we have a function that
doubles the elements of a list.
So this was just to give
you a quick intuition
on these key concepts
of currying and partial
application.